Draft v12 breaking changes (#681)
directus/docs: content/licensing/1.overview.md

---
title: Overview
headline: Licensing
description: How Directus licensing works, how to add a license, and what happens when you exceed your plan.
navigation:
  title: Overview
---

Directus is licensed under the [Monospace Sustainable Core License (MSCL)](https://directus.io/MSCL). Self-hosted instances without a license run on the **core tier**. To unlock additional capabilities or higher limits, add a license to your instance.

Free commercial use is available through the **[Open Innovation Grant](http://directus.io/oig)** for entities with less than $5M in annual revenue and fewer than 50 employees. Eligibility is assessed based on the legal entities whose representatives log into the Directus Studio. Full terms are set out in the grant usage agreement.

Quick links:

- [Enquire about a commercial license](https://directus.io/contact)
- [Upgrading to Directus 12 (existing customer)](#upgrading-to-directus-12)

## License Keys and License Tokens

> There are two ways to authenticate a license:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to obtain a license:
```

- **License key** — a string in the format `DXXXX-XXXXX-XXXXX-XXXXX-XXXXC`. On first use, it binds your license to a specific project and `PUBLIC_URL`. License keys can be set via environment variable or added through the Studio.

> - **License token** — a pre-issued token containing your entitlements, validated locally without contacting the licensing service. Tokens are only set via environment variable and are intended for **offline use**, in environments without outbound network access.

Reviewer: Worth a mention that any changes to the license require a new token

In online mode, your instance periodically revalidates with the Directus licensing service. Feature access, plan upgrades, and revocations propagate without restarting. Adding a license key through the Studio validates instantly.

This is the default mode and is appropriate for any instance with outbound network access.

### Offline Mode

In offline mode, the instance never contacts the licensing service. Validation happens locally against the token's signature and expiry. This is intended for air-gapped or restricted-network environments on paid plans.

Because offline instances cannot be reached, suspension or cancellation only takes effect when the token expires. New tokens must be issued and deployed manually.

Offline mode is only available on Enterprise plans. If you are running the core tier, you do not need a token — Directus has no license to validate.

## Configuration

Licenses are configured through one of three sources, applied in the following order of precedence:

| Source | Precedence | UI editable |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `LICENSE_KEY` (environment) | 1 | No |
| `LICENSE_TOKEN` (environment) | 2 | No |
| License key in database (set via Studio) | 3 | Yes |

> When a key or token is set in the environment, the Studio license editor is read-only — to change it, update the environment variable and restart.

Reviewer: https://github.com/directus/docs/pull/681/changes#r3311532295

If no license is configured, the instance runs on the core tier.

See the [General configuration](/configuration/general#license) reference for the full `LICENSE_KEY` and `LICENSE_TOKEN` environment variable details.

## License Statuses

| Status | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| **Active** | License is valid and the instance is within its entitlement limits. |

> | **Grace** | License has passed its expiry or the instance has exceeded its limits, but the configured grace period has not yet elapsed. The instance continues to operate normally. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Grace** | License has passed its expiry or the instance is within the v12 upgrade period, and the configured grace period has not yet elapsed. The instance continues to operate normally. |
```

> | **Locked** | The instance has exceeded its entitlement limits and is outside any applicable grace period. Requires resolution before normal operation can resume. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Locked** | The instance has exceeded its entitlement limits and is outside any applicable grace period. Main parts of the instance are locked down and resolution is required before normal operation can resume. |
```

To reuse the same license on the new URL without exceeding your license's activation limit, deactivate the license on the old instance **before** bringing the new one online. 

## Resolution Flow

If your instance exceeds its entitlements — for example, after downgrading a plan — the Studio surfaces a **Resource Resolution** screen for admins. This screen lists each entitlement that requires action:

- **Limit-based** entitlements show your current usage, the new limit, and a list of candidate records to deactivate.
- **Feature-gated** entitlements (such as SSO) show any blockers that must be resolved before the feature can be disabled — for example, admin accounts that need an email and password before SSO can be turned off.

Selecting candidates and submitting the resolution brings the instance back within its entitlements. Resources are deactivated rather than deleted, and the acting admin is always excluded from seat resolution.

## Locked-Down Instances

If an instance is over its entitlement limits and the grace period has elapsed, it enters a **locked-down** state. While locked down:

> - The REST `/items`, `/files`, and `/flows` endpoints are disabled.

Reviewer: May be best we do not specify which in case it changes
```suggestion
- Prevents common API operations (e.g. `/items` endpoints)
```

- The GraphQL, WebSockets, and MCP APIs are disabled.
- `/login` is blocked for non-admin users.
- SSO continues to work for admins so the license can be resolved.

Resolving the license — either by adding a valid key, reducing usage through the resolution flow, or purchasing addons — restores normal operation.

## Upgrading to Directus 12

::callout{icon="material-symbols:info-outline"}

> **Existing customers** should contact [licensing@directus.io](mailto:licensing@directus.io) to obtain your license before upgrading, or if you encounter any issues.

Reviewer 2: Is there no self-serve license system? is mailing the only option?

Author: Yes, for now
